[ music ]
We all know that NOAA satellites help
us forecast weather on Earth. But did you know that some weather satellites
also forecast weather in space?
[ music ]
[  music  ] [whoosh]
So why is
forecasting space weather important? The changing environmental conditions
from the Sun's atmosphere are known as space weather. Space weather is caused by
electromagnetic radiation and charged particles being released from solar storms.
Changes in the magnetic fields and a continuous flow of solar particles during a
powerful storm headed to Earth could cause disruption to communications and result
in exposure to dangerous radiation. Space weather
can disrupt high-frequency radio communications used by pilots.
During geomagnetic storms, airplanes flying over the poles are diverted or rerouted
so they don't lose critical positioning and communication with air traffic
control. Nowadays, farmers rely strongly on
high-precision GPS satellites to determine what to plant and where to plant it.
If GPS technology is affected by space weather, it could produce faulty coordinates,
resulting in losses for farmers.
During a solar storm, satellite TV, satellite radio, and other
satellite-based communications are at risk. Satellite operators have to avoid
certain operations, like uploading new software or executing complicated
maneuvers, because the data could be corrupted, or the entire satellite could even
be damaged. Electric power workers are also
affected by space weather, because large storms can induce currents in the electrical grid.
overloading transformers, and causing massive blackouts.
Space weather can also bring damaging radiation to
astronauts in space. Astronauts need to know when they should avoid space-walks,
and stay in better-shielded areas of the International Space Station.
Early warning for these users is absolutely critical, which is
why scientists and forecasters monitor GOES and other satellite data
around the clock. The next generation of GOES
weather satellites will provide the improved the data that space weather forecasters need
to detect initial solar flare eruptions and issue critical early warnings.
GOES-R data will also help forecasters measure radiation from the storm,
and determine the final impact.
Loaded with improved space weather instruments, the GOES-R series of satellites will provide
continuous delivery of crucial information to all users impacted by weather, not only
here on Earth, but also in space.
[ music ]
[ beep beep... beep beep... beep beep... ]